[Music]
welcome to top caste and part two of a
dream of Socrates from the beginning of
infinity by David Deutsch this chapter
is substantially a play of sorts there
are characters and there's a setting
that's a plot and decides to the
audience and here we meet the wider cast
last episode hermes came to Socrates in
a dream or by some other means means and
using a Socratic method drew out of
Socrates something close to the
epistemology of Karl Popper which is
critical rationalism now Socrates is
about to teach his companions what he'd
learned about epistemology now just for
some context one of the main
protagonists here is arista Cleese
commonly known as Plato Plato is a
student of Socrates and in turn
Aristotle was a student of Plato and we
also hear about KF on who's one of the
main characters kayfun was a friend of
Socrates around the same age as Socrates
while Plato's substantially younger and
at the time of the visit to Delphi
perhaps Plato was around about a
teenager I think k Ferran is a character
who's somewhat conservative in his
values and values tradition whereas
Plato is highly energetic and quick on
the uptake but slow to notice his own
errors at times as many of us think
plato for all of his genius goes on to
be one of the greatest apologists for
tyranny in the entire Western or ancient
Canon his book the Republic sees
democracy as necessarily falling into
tyranny one reason for this is that
Plato misunderstands what democracy
actually is and he thinks it's about who
should rule rather than as an
error-correcting mechanism that
misconception must be admitted that
almost everyone ever since has held and
it took Karl Popper to correct the
mistake Plato of course believed in
platonic ideals so there must be an
ideal kind of ruler who once they've
been installed would be quite wrong to
remove hence democracy cannot be the
best form of government except for all
those others that have been tried from
time to time
according to Plato Plato taught that if
a ruler let's say a king was also a
philosopher a philosopher being a lover
of wisdom then this would approach the
ideal popper himself laid out the blame
for totalitarianism in the 20th century
at the feet of Plato Plato was no doubt
a genius
absolutely the first order but some of
us don't really have much love from
being a genius doesn't mean that all of
your ideas are going to be good being a
genius might mean that some of your
arguments are great but it could also
mean that you're just a very very good
at providing excellent arguments for
really bad ideas
so while Socrates had all of the
questions and this is what some of us
loved about him the Socratic method
Plato was in possession of rather too
many ultimate answers or supposed
possession of answers anyway now the
character of Plato has presented by
David here is of course largely a comic
book version of the real Plato of whose
personality we don't know very much
David's Plato is extremely eager and
eager to please and very competitive
especially intellectually I think we've
all known people like this the Socrates
character demonstrates marvelous levels
of patience with his younger friend and
we can see the differences not only in
what we know about their philosophies or
world views but also the psychology that
is driven by those underlying
philosophies and which in turn may lead
to driving certain kinds of worldviews
there's the desire to investigate on the
part of Socrates versus the desire for
answers there's patient thoughtfulness
versus our competitive approach there's
creative conjecture versus extrapolation
from some perceived pattern so I think
David here captures much of Plato's
philosophy in his character
as we'll see and we will hear how
Socrates actually improves on what he
learned from the god Hermes while Plato
gets Socrates increasingly wrong and
that too is a deep message about
critical rationalism and learning that
any lesson no matter how well delivered
and with what clarity can be muddled
even by the supposedly most intelligent
person in the room the second part of
our story begins with Kay Ferran
knocking on Socrates door at the end
where they are staying at Delphi
apparently waking him from his dream
soon Plato joins them and launches into
his conversation barely waiting for
replies as is his character socrates
good morning thank you again a
thousandfold for letting me come on this
pilgrimage but I was thinking last night
does it really count as a revelation if
the Oracle tells us only what we know we
already knew there was no one wiser than
you so I thought should
we go back and demand a free question
but then I thought sterkens Socrates her
no wait don't tell me the answer let me
tell you my best guess first so I
thought yes we already know he's the
wisest and then he's modest but we
didn't know quite how honest and that's
what the God revealed to us that sucker
needs are so modest the head contradict
even and God saying his wise and another
thing we knew of Socrates excellence but
now Apollo has revealed it to the whole
world but I wish the whole world had
chipped in for the sea what was that
don't get it right Oh
Socrates can I call you master No
so there we have Plato's showing a bit
of his character after this section
comes another and I'm going to skip that
one where Plato reveals his admiration
for Sparta he wanted to call Socrates
master because that's what Spartans do
he admires their martial prowess
so he's impressed by the use of force he
mentions how devout Spartans are with
respect to the gods and this indeed has
some upsides they maintain the peace of
Delphi for example Plato the character
has what I might call not merely the
irritating habit of extrapolating from
what someone says but rather attributing
those extrapolations to the mind of the
speaker rather than to his own
imagination finally he played her shuts
up long enough so that Socrates can tell
him about what else Hermes has said
it wasn't quite like that he came to
reveal to me a new branch of philosophy
epistemology knowledge about knowledge
which also has implications for morality
and other fields much of it I already
knew or partially knew in various
special cases but he gave me a God's eye
overview which was breathtaking
interestingly he mainly did this by
asking me questions and inviting me to
think about certain things it seems an
effective technique and I try it some
time
tell us everything Socrates start with
the most interesting thing he asked and
your reply well one thing he asked me
was to imagine a Spartan Socrates a spot
what oh I see
that must be who the Oracle meant how
sneaky Apollo is it's the Spartan
Socrates who is the wisest man in the
world the only way I breadth of herebut
but being Spartan he's probably the
greatest warrior as well awesome
of course I know you were a great
warrior in your day to Socrates but
still a Spartan Socrates so we're going
to spider the scene right away please
[Music]
so epistemology is knowledge about
knowledge and whenever God's eye view it
is breathtaking and that's quite true
recognizing small parts of epistemology
is something all of us can do without
much learning but when you take a deeper
interest in any field the whole can
become breathtaking and epistemology is
very much like this because it is
Universal in its domain which means it
applies to everything and epistemology
as the point of V in the beginning of
infinity aims to show is is the very
thing knowledge is the very thing
epistemology is the very thing that
transforms the entire world epistemology
being the process of finding new
knowledge or creating new knowledge so
it's not a parochial human concern of an
esoteric bit of philosophy really
epistemology is the reason why large
portions of planet Earth look the way
they do it is what explains societies to
persist while other that's go extinct as
Socrates says at one stage onlys made me
aware of the fundamental distinction
between the Athenian proach to life and
the Spartan it is that wait I talk this
sounds fascinating
I'll start because this is basically
what my poem was about well the Spartan
half of the riddle is easy spider
glories in war and she values all the
associated virtues such as courage and
endurance and so on many of socrates
companions suggest answers to the riddle
of what the basic difference is between
Sparta and Athens
I think that the God told me what their
overarching concern is and he also told
me what houses though alas we also fight
for all sorts of other reasons of which
we often repent those two overarching
concerns of these we Athenians are
concerned above all with improvement the
spartans seek only stasis two opposite
objectives if you think about it I
believe you'll soon agree that this is
the single source of the myriad of
differences between the two cities I
never thought of it that way before but
I think I do agree
let me try out the theory he's one
difference between the cities Speier has
no philosophers that's because the job
of a philosopher is to understand things
better which is a form of change so they
don't want it and another difference is
they don't on a living poet only dead
ones why because dead poet's don't write
anything new but live ones do a third
difference their education system is
insanely harsh houses famously lacks why
because they don't want their kids to
dare question anything so they won't
ever think of changing anything how am i
doing you are quick on the uptake as
usual arista Cleese however but there
we've heard the difference
Athens wants improvement while Sparta
wants stasis and this is the single
source of all the other differences
between the two cities and of course
between so-called dynamic societies as
david terms them or open societies as
papa would say and static societies
societies that do not want change but we
haven't yet heard what exactly makes a
dynamic society a society that values
improvement Socrates says that in Sparta
there are no people like him and no
leaders who want improvement as he says
in Sparta there are no such politicians
and no such Sophists and no gadflies
such as me because any Spartan who did
doubt or disapprove of the way things
have always been done would keep it to
himself what few new ideas they do have
are intended to sustain the city more
securely in its current state as for war
I know that there are Spartans who glory
in war and would love to conquer and
enslave the whole world just as they
once set out to conquer their neighbors
yet the institutions of their city and
the deep assumptions that are built into
the minds of even their hotheads embody
a visceral fear of
any such step into the unknown perhaps
it is significant that the statue of
Ares that stands outside Sparta
represents him chained so that he will
always be there to protect the city is
that not the same as preventing the god
of violence from breaking discipline
from being loosed upon the world to
cause random mayhem with it's terrifying
risk of change so there's a hint at the
key the key difference between the
static and dynamic societies any new
ideas the Spartans do manage to come up
with a retained only insofar as they can
sustain the city more securely in its
current state so let's think of
contemporary examples China has an
amount has lots of amazing new
technologies specifically for monitoring
its citizens it has cameras it has
systems to see what you're up to to
monitor your use on the Internet while
you're you your use of the Internet they
have a system of social credit they call
it and if your credit your social credit
is low and they're monitoring the things
that you're getting up to to inform the
government about whether or not you're a
good citizen if your credit is low
you're gonna have trouble you're even
gonna have trouble buying food at the
supermarket because your social credit
is too low forget about your financial
credit Social Credit is maintained and
monitored by a complex computer system
and it's determined by the extent to
which you fall in line with what society
expects of you a new idea that's a new
idea so it's a new idea they've had
using technology to maintain the status
crop quo so they've got a new idea it's
just that it maintains order in China in
the West we don't quite have things as
bad as that although sometimes you see
people wanting to monitor people's use
on the use of the internet but there are
forms of stasis which try to maintain
the status quo certainly sustainability
is one such maintaining the same
environment in some courts ort of
so-called ideal State or closer to ideal
status if there is some kind of ideal
kind of environment we are far from
immune here in the West now
Socrates then goes on to convey rather
frightening message about how society
such as Sparta view Athens as a threat
even if Athens is peacefully keeping to
itself because the very existence of
Athens however peaceful is a deadly
threat to Sparta stasis and therefore in
the long run the condition for the
continued stasis of Sparta which means
its continued existence as they see it
it is the destruction of progress in
Athens which from our perspective would
constitute the destruction of Athens I
still do not see specifically what the
threat is well suppose that in future
both cities were to continue to succeed
with their overarching concerns the
Spartans would stay exactly as they are
now but we Athenians are already the
envy of other Greeks with our wealth and
diverse achievements what will happen
when we improve further and begin to
outshine everyone in the world at
everything
Spartan Solon crab will interact with
foreigners but they cannot keep
themselves entirely in England some
developments elsewhere even going to war
gives them some inkling of what life is
like in other cities that are wealthier
and freer than they are one day some
Spartan goons visiting Delphi will find
that it is the Athenians who have the
better moves and the greater skill what
if in a generation or two Athenian
warriors have developed some better
moves on the battlefield so the creation
of knowledge anyway in progress anywhere
is a threat to such places what unites
the regime's have let's say Iran and
North Korea to talk about contemporary
examples and other places in their
apoplectic hatred of the United States
and other countries in the West let's
consider what what is that what is the
thing that that that they hate about the
United States so much or about Europe or
other places well it to some extent it
might be fear of weapons but more than
that more than that even if the United
States had less weapons even if the
United States wasn't wasn't a military
threat to Iran or to North Korea it is
the knowledge and the ideas that are in
places like the United States that
threaten the regime's of Iran and North
Korea yeah
South Korean activists kind of
understand this South Korean activists
will take hot-air balloons or helium
balloons with mobile phones attached and
have them sail over the border the
Demilitarized Zone in separating North
and South Korea so the phone's not
because they're hoping I don't know the
the phone will be some kind of kind of
weapon that when it falls out of the sky
fall into the head of a soldier and kill
him no it's so that the phone will land
in the hands of a citizen who can then
use the phone to find out something new
to find out something new and it's the
knowledge that would transform North
Korea less than the guns the knowledge
can cause the citizens to change their
ideas and you get enough citizens to
change their ideas and then you can have
a regime change so I'm skipping another
section now where Socrates warns that
even societies like Athens which are
open societies should be conscious of
how democracy can go wrong for indeed it
has over time by the way we ourselves
should be at least as wary of democracy
as I think the Spartans are of bloodlust
and of battle rage for it is
intrinsically as dangerous we could not
do without a democracy anymore than the
Spartans could do without their military
training and just as they have moderated
the destructiveness of bloodlust through
their traditions of discipline and
caution we have moderated the
destructiveness of democracy through our
traditions of virtue tolerance and
Liberty we are utterly dependent upon
those traditions to keep our monster
under control and on our side just as
the Spartans are dependent on their
traditions to keep their monster from
devouring them along with everyone else
in sight we might do well to put up a
statue of democracy chained to symbolize
the fundamental safeguard of our city so
when Socrates says that bit there Plato
scribbles down notes
Plato's been recording right with
increasing in accuracy what Socrates has
been saying plato's notes read democracy
as amongst our dangerous if not chained
which is of course a step too far what
Socrates is in fact saying is that not
all democracies are created equal there
are traditions that are needed to help
democracy not become a monster in the
first place that would require training
this is why it has been said that for
example the Westminster system is so
excellent it's where traditions are
ancient and they've been hard tested
over time against many difficult real
life situations many difficult real life
scenarios the monarch has been denuded
of almost all power and and most
centrally important to that is that the
monarch makes no rules the monarch is
not a ruler in that sense they don't
create new legislation all the monarch
has is so-called reserve powers to
remove the government if things just
aren't working at all and to have a new
election this kind of thing can ensure
stability under rapid change now if you
bit self-indulgent if you google my name
Britt Hall and the phrase Republicans
versus monarchists then you'll find an
article I wrote about that in particular
about how certain kinds of
constitutional monarchy have in explicit
knowledge instantiated in the traditions
and the systems which ensure the
stability under change and we should be
hesitant to go tinkering with it too
much because we don't know all the ways
in which it works or the reasons why it
works much less the ways in which could
fail if you tinker with it
now of course there also exists upper
and lower houses in good democracies and
Supreme Court such as in Australia of
the United States to settle certain
disputes between the branches of
government on the other hand some
systems do not permit Parliament's to
initiate legislation so although they
superficially appear to be democracies
they in fact aren't because the people
that are elected can't create
legislation they can't initiate
legislation they can't creatively come
up with good ideas or new ideas and in
other those kind of systems there's ways
and means of unelected people coming up
with legislation that can then affect
the lives of many many different people
this is rather like the European
Parliament in the European Commission
that worked together in this way the
Commission can create new legislation
initiate new legislation
and all the parliament can do is vote
upon that legislation and in fact
commission can overrule the Parliament
so we have the appearance of democracy
only you can't vote the commissioners
out you can't vote the rulers out but
people that make the rules traditions
evolve over time incrementally under the
pressures of dealing with real social
problems and in this way processes and
subsystems and cultures are whittled
whittled away into kind of this machine
that's well oiled machine for a critical
debate and building consensus and for
getting things done and most especially
rejecting bad ideas and rulers and
though David doesn't quite say this here
it seems to me to be somewhat implied
democracy can elect tyrants and so the
tyranny are and indeed the tyranny of a
majority over minorities can be a real
hazard in almost any democracy so we
need democratic institutions to guard
against this perversion it's not just
democracy it's traditions within that
democracy as well and systems within
that democracy in the real world we do
not just have a congress or just a House
of Representatives we have other checks
and balances we have things like houses
of review the Senate or House of Lords
we have courts we have heads of state so
this is the sense in which democracy has
changed as well as many other things
that I haven't mentioned there it is
restricted to some extent from overreach
and tyranny the Plato doesn't quite get
this Plato finds the concern about the
runaway excesses that are possible in
democracy as problems that cannot be
solved and so concludes democracy itself
must be chained completely the only way
to do this in his viewers with so-called
benevolent dictators philosopher kings
that's a frightening prospect and yet we
hear it again and again from public
intellectuals these days most especially
any time you hear someone argue for more
X in government where X is usually a
scientist or some other kind of
intellectual you're hearing an argument
for a philosopher King a claim that
someone is less prone to error or
especially better at knowing what is
best for everyone else in some cases and
I won't mention names because these are
people I respect these public
intellectuals
I have heard explicit regret about only
if we could have a benevolent dictator
a scientifically minded benevolent
dictator instead of the present systems
around the world and that benevolent
dictator could right the wrongs as if
there would be less fallible now indeed
in the next part that I'm about to read
the Companions discuss how if sparta
figured out that the fact that thinkers
philosophers and science and so on were
useful in a society then they could
become far more powerful kafir on sounds
this site sounds like a dangerous secret
to be discussing out in the open if the
spartans in general were capable of
understanding that secret
they'd have implemented it long ago and
there'd be no war between our cities if
some individual sparked and tried to
advocate new philosophical ideas he
would soon find himself on trial for
heresy or any number of other crimes
unless unless what unless the one who
had taken up philosophy was a king trust
you to find the logical loophole
rustically use
theoretically a right but in sparta even
the kings are not allowed to change
anything important if one were to try it
would be deposed by the ephors well they
have two kings five equals and twenty
eight senators so mathematics tells us
but if only 15 senators three opposed
and one king would to take up philosophy
yes Arista cleese I concede if the
rulers of Sparta would have take up our
style of philosophy and were then to
seriously embark upon criticizing and
reforming their traditions more likely
that one benevolent King would have
seized power
so there's Plato getting the Republic
room I'll just skip ahead to where
you'll say it's knowledge wrong
he scribbles down Socrates as the wisest
man in the world
the finest man in the world because he's
the only one who knows he has no
knowledge because genuine knowledge is
impossible weight justified belief is
impossible really are you sure sorry but
it's a somewhat perverse question there
is to Cleese how I see no the Plato is
just asked for a justification of the
belief that one cannot justify beliefs
no I'm not sure of anything I never have
been but the God explained to me why
that must be so starting with the fell
ability of the human mind and the
reliability of sensory experience not
only knowledge of the material world
it's impossible useless and undesirable
he gave me a marvelous perspective on
how we perceive the world each of your
eyes is like a dark little cave one on
whose rear wall some stray shadows fall
from outside you spend your whole life
at the back of that cave able to see
nothing but the real wall so you cannot
see reality directly at all you're
prisoners chained inside a cave and
permitted to look only at the real world
we can never know the reality outside
because we only see fleeting distorted
chatter note how Socrates is slightly
improving on Hermes here and Plato has
been increasingly misinterpreting
Socrates he then went on to explain to
me that objective knowledge is indeed
possible it comes from within it begins
as conjecture and then it is corrected
by repeated cycles of criticism
including comparison with the evidence
on how wall the only true knowledge is
that which comes from within
how remembered from a previous life in
this way we frail and fallible humans
can come to no objective reality
provided we use philosophically sound
methods as I have described which most
people do not they come to know the true
world beyond the illusory experience but
only by pursuing the King leotta
philosophy Socrates you really ought to
write all this down together with all
your other wisdom for the benefit of the
whole world and posterity
no need Arista Cleaves posterity is
right here listening posterity is all of
you my friends what's the point of
writing down things that are going to be
endlessly tinkered with and improved
rather than make a permanent record of
all my misconceptions as they are at a
particular instance I would rather offer
them to others in a two-way debate that
way I benefit from criticism and may
even make improvements myself whatever
is valuable will survive such debates
and be passed on without any effort from
me whatever is not valuable would only
make me look a fool to future
generations if you say so master it's
like part to a I'm not going to move on
to part to be by changing location
okay after that quick change of location
and apologies for the camera quality I'm
just doing a quick and cheap version of
there just a final part of this chapter
I'm really looking forward to doing the
next chapter on the multiverse and there
I can promise you some higher quality
visuals so at the end here of chapter 10
a dream of Socrates there's just a short
section that David has written that he
is outside of the rest of the chapter so
to speak it's not in theatrical or play
form and he begins the last bit of the
chapter by talking about the so called
Socratic problem the Socratic problem is
Socrates never wrote anything himself
the only reports we have are from Plato
who did write down some stuff and
Plato's character of Socrates changes
throughout his writings
of course the classic Socrates is
thought of as the person who invented
the Socratic method he is this
interlocutor who probes with questions
to try and elicit the knowledge that the
other person involved in a dialogue
often already possesses or if they don't
possess it's through clever questioning
that they're able to use their own
reason to conjure new knowledge so I'm
not going to read that particular part
of David's exposition I'm just going to
concentrate on something he says here in
part of the essay effectively that's at
the end of this chapter importantly the
section where he tries to explain how
learning occurs and how communication
can be difficult because of the way
knowledge is actually constructed
because it's not justified true belief
because knowledge isn't a fluid of some
sort you can't pour it from one person
into the next the process whereby
knowledge is produced in the mind of a
learner in the mind of someone who's
trying to understand something has to be
a process of conjecture and refutation
of of them guessing what the meaning is
that you're trying to impart and so this
has all sorts of interesting
consequences because you can't speak
perfectly they can't understand you
perfectly
there is no fallible means of
transmission
between what you know and what the other
person is trying to understand and so
quite often what happens is
miscommunication and so I'm just going
to read a section here from the end of
chapter 10 where David writes in reality
the communication of new ideas even
mundane ones like directions depends on
guesswork on the part of both the
recipient and the communicator and is
inherently fallible hence there is no
reason to expect that the young Plato
just because he was intelligent and
highly educated and by all accounts a
near worshipper of Socrates made the
fewest mistakes in conveying Socrates
theories on the contrary the default
assumption should be that
misunderstandings are ubiquitous and
that neither intelligence nor the
intention to be accurate is any
guarantee against them it could easily
be that the young Plato misunderstood
everything that Socrates said to him and
that the older Plato gradually succeeded
in understanding it and is therefore the
more reliable guide or it could be the
plate has slipped ever further into
misinterpretation and into positive
errors of his own evidence argument and
explanation are needed to distinguish
between these and many other
possibilities it is a difficult task for
historians objective knowledge though
attainable is hard to attain I'll finish
there and just my commentary on that
this has important consequences of
course for teaching and learning we are
taught I daresay all of us that Erich is
a bad thing or that error is somehow
something that deserves to be
reprimanded but when genuine efforts are
made on the part of someone trying to
learn something and they fail at that
it's a necessary part of the learning
process because the speak can speak
erroneously they can fallowed ly try to
transmit some knowledge and fail at it
they can be fairly err on the part of
the listener and that's no fault of
their own either because that's part of
being human we're not gods and this is
putting aside the fact that institutions
like schools are inherently coercive
anyway and so the person attempting to
learn is doing it under duress quite
often and trying to learn things that
they're just not interested in so all of
this is stacked against the typical
student because the entire culture
of whether it be primary schools
secondary school tertiary education is
one in which errors are punished because
of course we do so-called assessment
tasks examinations we write essays and
then we get graded upon those and why do
we get graded we get great or how do we
get graded we are graded to the extent
that we've met so called outcomes and
outcomes are where we haven't made
mistakes in learning the whole purpose
supposedly of school in university is to
learn but the process of learning
requires that we make errors along the
way but errors are not rewarded instead
errors are punished through bad marks or
low rankings and so on but the Aaronic
thing is that a high rate of errors
typically means you're making lots and
lots of fast progress and of course
there are some wrinkles here someone who
just attempt to write down all the wrong
answers in an examination is of course
deliberately making lots and lots of
errors but that's almost never the case
and sometimes people don't put in any
effort but why should they put in any
effort to something that they don't
really have any interest in that
ok this will take us too far afield from
this particular chapter so let me get
back to reading a little bit about the
culture of philosophy as an academic
discipline in particular and I don't
think it was until I read the beginning
of infinity there really reflected upon
this and realized that when I was at
university studying philosophy that in
fact it's a rather bizarre thing to
study not just because as many people
complain it doesn't have a lot of
practical use although I think it does
but rather for these reasons that
David's about to mention so let me read
he writes
courses in philosophy place great weight
on reading original texts and
commentaries on them in order to
understand the theories that were in the
minds of the various great philosophers
this focus on history is odd and is in
marked contrast to all other academic
disciplines except perhaps the history
itself for example in all the physics
courses that I undertook at university
mates who by the way both as an
undergraduate and as a graduate student
I cannot recall a single instance where
any original papers or books by the
great physicists evolved was studied or
even on the reading list only when a
course touched upon very recent
discoveries than we ever read the work
of their
cover us so we learned Einstein's theory
of relativity without ever hearing from
Einstein we knew Maxwell Boltzmann
Schrodinger Heisenberg and so on
only as names we read their theories in
textbooks whose authors were physicists
not historians of physics who themselves
may never have read the works of these
pioneers why the immediate reason is
that the original sources of scientific
theories are almost never good sources
how could they be all subsequent
expositions are intended to be
improvements on them and some succeed
and improvements are cumulative and
there is a deeper reason the originators
of a fundamental new theory initially
share many of the misconceptions of
previous theories they need to develop
an understanding of how and why those
theories are flawed and how the new
theory explains everything that they
explained but most people who
subsequently learn the new theory have
quite different concerns often they just
want to take the theory for granted and
use it to make predictions or to
understand some complex phenomena in
combination with other theories or they
may want to understand nuances of it
that have nothing to do with why it is
superior to the old theories or they may
want to improve it but what they no
longer care about is tracking down and
definitively meeting every last
objection that would naturally be made
by someone thinking in terms of older
superseded theories there is rarely any
reason for scientists to address the
obsolete problem situations that
motivated the great scientists of the
past pausing there and just my
commentary but in philosophy that's
precisely what goes on when you're
trying to understand some of what
Descartes wrote about I loved a card I
love reading Descartes meditations in
particular and Descartes had this thing
called the method of doubt and a method
a doubt was a very interesting
philosophical thought experiment it's
basically about what the limits of doubt
heart is there anything that you can't
doubt and so when you read him he's
sitting by the fireplace and he is
wondering whether or not his body is
real could he doubt his body and he
concludes that yes he could doubt that
his body is real because he might be
dreaming he can't sometimes tell whether
during a dream if he's actually dreaming
or if he's awake whatever the case this
idea it's sometimes known as the cogito
from cogito ergo sum which is Latin for
I think therefore
interestingly enough and the meditations
he never says I think therefore I am
he says I think I am and I think I am as
a necessary truth each time someone
thinks and so this is supposed to be
something that's infallible many many
modern philosophers that they take it
for granted that this is the fundamental
thing that you cannot doubt you cannot
doubt your own existence so long as you
think well then if you think even if
that thought is trying to doubt that
you're thinking something is doing the
doubting therefore that thing exists
okay whatever the case I won't go into
the details why I now think that in fact
is wrong that's misconceived
it's a misconception to think that that
is an infallible truth rather what's
interesting about this is that we read
it in Descartes meditations we read the
translation of the French they can't
read in French and we consulted the the
original and we critique to the original
and then we read some commentaries on
the original namely other philosophers
who criticized Descartes
but why why aren't there texts of
philosophy where you can just look up
Descartes cogito well in fact you can
these days has lots of popular
philosophy books when you're not reading
the philosophers ideas in their own
words in their original words but rather
someone else who has distilled out the
useful stuff and I think that's a far
better way to learn philosophy in fact
sometimes the writing is quite beautiful
I should say that I do enjoy reading
people like David Hume I think that's
interesting and of course Kyle Pape is
very interesting and clear David Deutsch
of course but as those old philosophies
especially are critiqued and improved
there's no reason for us to go back
except as a matter of some sort of
literature to read the old philosophers
there's better ways to understand those
ideas now and I'll just read one final
bit here right at the end of this
chapter and David's further talking
about why we wouldn't consult the the
original formulation of any scientific
theory so we wouldn't go to iron Stein's
original papers published in 1915 to
understand the theory of relativity for
example
David writes the reason why the
scientists are trying to learn the
theory and also one they have such
disregard for the faithfulness to the
original is that they want another look
how the world is crucially this is the
same objective that the originator of
the theory had if it is a good theory if
it is a superb theory as the fundamental
theories of physics nowadays are then it
is exceedingly hard to very while still
remaining a viable explanation so the
learners through criticism of their
initial guesses and with the help of
their books teachers and colleagues
seeking a viable explanation will arrive
at the same theory as the originator
that is how the theory manages to be
passed faithfully from generation to
generation despite no one caring about
its faithfulness one way or the other so
I'll pause there this is a remarkably
optimistic way of thinking about
learning that let's say you're
interested in physics and a lot of
people when they're interested in
physics they follow a sort of classical
trajectory through physics where you
learn some algebra and some calculus you
learn about so-called classical
mechanics most of it was invented by
created by discovered by Newton and
Laplace and some others and then you
move on to relativity by Einstein then
you move on to quantum theory and then
and then it gets more specialized from
there now the interesting thing here
about what David said is that if you're
trying to genuinely understand Newton's
theory and you will eventually do feel
you have a good grasp of Newton's theory
you've gone through the same process as
Newton you are now smart as what Newton
was in terms of that theory you
understand the theory as well as
probably better than what Newton did
because Newton didn't understand all the
ways in which his theory was actually
wrong and now we do and probably an
understanding Newton's theory you know
how some ID if you understand it well of
the flaws in Newton's theory so that's
really interesting so I'll say that
again in a different way if you're
trying to understand and you actually
succeed in understanding you really feel
you've succeeded in comprehending the
special theory of relativity
invented by Einstein discovered by
Einstein then you're just as good as
Einstein in terms of that theory
because you've gone through a similar
process if you've actually tried to
learn it you've tried to solve certain
problems at least the scientists who are
trying to use the special theory of
relatively let's say to solve certain
practical problems they will have gone
through that process okay
proper physicists will have gone through
that process proper proper chemists will
look onto the process that Mendeleev
used in order to understand the periodic
table and so on now in the next chapter
chapter 11 the multiverse which I've
been really excited about completing
it's gonna take me some weeks I think to
do that one
it's about quantum theory it's about how
we best understand quantum theory today
its controversial but it's not more
controversial than other aspects of just
quantum theory once you try and
understand it and the struggle that
people have even today in appreciating
what quantum theory is saying about
reality and the world that we live in is
due in large part to consulting the
original authors of quantum theory so to
speak they were struggling very much to
try and understand what on earth reality
was telling us about itself through this
theory of quantum physics and initially
we had all sorts of really weird ideas
people were saying that this kind of
suggested things like electrons atoms
even could be both particles a particle
is the thing that is isolated at a place
and a time so it's it's right here right
now it's in a particular place in time
it's isolated to a point in other words
that's what a particle is but atoms and
electrons for example they're particles
but they can also sometimes be waves
simultaneously and a wave it's not a
thing that's isolated at a point in
space a wave is a thing that is extended
throughout space so in other words
quantum theory on this view and it's
sometimes called the Copenhagen
interpretation on this view on the
Copenhagen interpretation something like
an atom is both a particle
isolated at a point and a wave extended
throughout space isolated at a point and
not isolated at a point simultaneously
that was the original view of quantum
theory people ever since have consulted
the original authors of quantum theory
people like Heisenberg and Dirac and
Schrodinger who were debating all of
this at the time and struggling to try
and understand what the meaning of all
this was and because they're just
throwing around ideas they were making
lots of errors as you do when you're
trying to understand something new the
problem now in the culture and the
culture of physics in particular is it
resembles to some extent that mistake
that philosophy still makes today namely
consulting the original authors of the
theory and trying to see what better
insight they had back then and their
confusion has filtered through to today
there was someone who actually figured
out his name was Hugh Everett he figured
out how best to interpret quantum theory
realistically speaking in other words in
a way that didn't violate logic in a way
that didn't upset the normal
understanding of the way in which words
are used so that we can understand
quantum theory in a realistic way now it
says some profound and interesting
things but it makes sense even if those
things are profound and interesting
anyway I'm getting ahead of myself
because that's going to be in the next
chapter um now I just absolute final
thing for this chapter
and addendum to what I said earlier
about the different kinds of democracies
David tweeted just just after I think I
recorded that last video where I was
trying to explain how certain kinds of
democracies might be better than some
others or certain so-called democracies
might be better than some others in
particular I was talking about the what
I called the excellence of the
Westminster system and compared it to
certain other systems mainly the let's
say the EU parliamentary system in the
EU parliamentary system the
parliamentarians there the members of
the European Parliament can't initiate
legislation the rulers the people making
the rules they're in the commission the
EU Commission and they create the
legislation
the voters have no way of removing those
rulers the Commission people are
installed by national governments and so
they immune to being removed so if they
make a mistake if they make bad policies
there's nothing that the voters can do
about that now sometimes people have
complained that oh well that's like your
queen that's like a queen in the
Commonwealth okay the Queen of England
did the head of state there not really
because again as I exploit try to
explain the head of state in the
Westminster system has zero legislative
power they can't make up policies okay
they have a certain constitutional
function but they do not make rules and
so because they don't make policies
there's no reason to try and correct
them now there could be things that go
wrong in a constitutional monarchy with
the monarch absolutely okay absolutely
absolutely but the constitutional
monarchy just by looking and observing
and trying to explain the world as it is
has shown itself to be a robust
institution that allows for great
stability under fast progress so it's no
accident many of us think that the
Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution
in particular happened in England and
around the United Kingdom and how could
you have such great change political
change scientific change cultural change
and yet the society to remain quite
stable
well we think in certainly in large
parts because of this parliamentary
democracy in a particular constitutional
monarchy now I an extra thing to say
about this is there a way of let's say
ranking something like the Westminster
system against another good system like
the United States Republic
okay the United States democratic system
or or Republican system as they often
say it's a republic rather than a
democracy some people say it's still a
democracy in poppers of you a democracy
is nothing but a system which allows the
removal of rulers the purpose of
democracy is the removal of rulers that
you don't want there anymore
okay without violence without violence
that's the point of a democracy
now I hint at what I'm about to say in
that article that I pointed people to
monarchist versus Republicans in
Australia again you can google that one
where we're actually hint that in
Australia there there has been a debate
over the years about whether or not we
should remove the British monarch as a
head of state and instead have a
president a president of Australia who
would be separate to the Prime Minister
of Australia and the rest of the
government in Australia now I don't
completely object to this but I object
to certain models of this so I say in my
article without going back and reading
it right now trying to this from memory
I say in part there that certain models
of an Australian Republic would be a
really bad idea if we were to just take
our the substitute we have for the head
of state the technical head of state is
the queen the queen of Australia is the
queen of India she's the queen of Great
Britain she's the queen and she's our
technical head of statement
representative in Australia is called
the governor-general of Australia the
governor-general of Australia can
technically remove the government and
it's happened once before where the
governor-general has removed the Prime
Minister now if that works works
reasonably well although you know that
was called the constitutional crisis
when the prime minister at the time
called Gough Whitlam was removed back in
the 70s some people still disagree about
that and there's a whole bunch of
material out there about whether it was
legal to do and what happened it's all
very interesting politically speaking in
terms of history and the less Australia
has remained politically relatively
stable for a long long time there's been
not in other words there's been no
violent insurrections over the years now
if we would have just replaced the
governor-general as representative of
the claim and have exactly the same
position filled by a president appointed
by the Parliament because the Governor
General is appointed by the Parliament
and then the Queen approves or something
it's just a matter of ticking of if we
would have President of Australia
instead of governor-general of Australia
and call ourselves a republic that
wouldn't worry me too much but some
models for an Australian Republic call
for a popularly elected president which
i think would be a terrible idea and the
reason I think it would be a terrible
idea is because then you'd have a nother
seat of power in Australia we've got the
House of Representatives and we have the
Australian Senate and these two houses
form the Parliament of Australia there's
an executive within the Parliament of
Australia but it's not separately
elected ok the executive is the Prime
Minister and his cabinet and they're the
ones that do the day-to-day business of
governing the governor-general has
absolutely no power to create
legislation he's not a ruler or she's
not a ruler all they do is if there's a
crisis a constitutional crisis they can
create another election ok or in fact
remove the entire government and put the
opposition in if the opposition can form
a government ok don't want to get into
the nuances of that if you had an
elected president here in Australia
you'd have the Senate you have the House
of Representatives and then you'd have
an elected president let's say the
policies of the government of the Prime
Minister and of the House of
Representatives differed starkly from
the policies of the President of
Australia the president of Australia if
they're popular elected would be
popularly elected during an election
where they're standing up in front of
the TV cameras and so on and giving
interviews about why they're the best
person and why they're the best person
would have to come down to what ideas
they have for Australia they would have
policies about what's best so now you've
got a problem if you have a popular
elected president in Australia and a
popularly elected government led by a
prime minister if there was a difference
of opinion what do you do and what would
the population do if the Prime Minister
was constantly in disagreement with the
president and could the president remove
the Prime Minister if there's a
sufficient disagreement and would they
just be if there
different parties just constantly
removing one another would it just be a
constitutional crisis almost all the
time let's consider what's happening
right now I'm recording this in 2020 the
president United States is currently
under impeachment and the process is
going through the American Senate
this is distracting from the normal
business of government it's for some
people for some anarchists out there
this is a good thing it's slowing down
the ability of the government to
actually do anything useful and buy
useful some anarchists some certain
people who don't really buy the idea
that states are necessarily a good thing
as in you know large state apparatus so
if you can slow down the government from
doing stuff you're actually slowing down
the government from impeding progress
I'll leave that aside for the purpose of
a functioning government the problem
then becomes that you have various seats
of power and these various seats of
power mean that none of that all of them
can deny responsibility when things go
wrong I just want you read David
deutsches tweet back on the 24th of
January 2020 and he wrote in his tweet
having an elected executive independent
of the legislature is already bad
dissipates responsibility away from both
don't know how to fix that
he was talking about the United States
here and he rather wryly suggests
consider amending the Constitution to
revert to a parliamentary system and
inviting Harry and Megan to be king and
queen so possible but what he's saying
there and I tend to agree is that the
United States is a great democracy the
United Kingdom great democracy but
really objectively speaking one is more
democratic than the other
the Westminster parliamentary system is
better why because when a mistake is
made by the rulers by the government as
a whole in some way there's a clear
accountability on the part of the
Westminster system in terms of
the government the government and the
House of Commons in particular are the
people responsible for what's going on
in the United States you have Congress
and you have the Senate and you also
have the independently elected executive
namely the president and so when the
Congress and the President as is
happening right now are at loggerheads
less happens and this happened under
Obama as well and it happened under
Clinton it's happened again and again in
the United States now some might see
this as a virtue because it slows down
the ability of the government to
actually do too much in theory in
practice however many people are worried
about just how much the United States
government is doing the federal
government is doing they think they
should be doing less again the point of
government on Pappas view is that it is
a system for removing rulers with no
violence and the rulers we want to
remove are the rulers who've made policy
mistakes over time but if you've got
distributed power such that the
president let's say is popularly elected
and the Congress is popularly elected
and both can kind of come up with rules
the president can make can regulate and
the Congress can legislate then the
difficulty there is there is if there's
a problem arising whatever that problem
is out there in reality okay in
Australia right now we have a drought
going on and there's various different
policies about what we should do to try
and conserve water or to create some
more water by desalination and so on
when there's a real problem out there in
the world for which government might be
a useful solution or might be able to
bring to bear a useful solution if I was
to migrate this problem to the United
States the president might be able to
make some regulations about what should
happen with the water the Congress might
be able to make some legislation about
building dams and so on and when these
two things are at loggerheads who've
owned another when they disagree with
one another then both sides can say it's
the other person's fault so they are
immune to a certain amount of
responsibility
when in reality what you want from a
political leader is the ability to
conquer the policy they then get voted
for laying out the policy and if the
policy fails then it is clearly their
responsibility they can't turn around
and say oh I did my best but it was the
other mob with power that was the
problem in fact here in Australia right
now there in fact is a version of this
where there is the federal government
and there's the state government and the
federal government and state government
are complaining when it comes to bush
fires that have been happening and for
example the drought situation I was just
talking about where both of these seats
of power have responsibility for the
same thing in a sense and so they're
both complaining that it's the other mob
who is actually in charge of this and
it's the other mob who should be held
responsible for things going wrong for
the problems that are happening all
because the institutions are not
perfectly in line with papas criterion
of democracy namely they have to be able
to be removed on the basis that their
policies are bad and if their policies
are bad and if their policies are bad
then we can clearly identify that it is
that group that group of leaders that is
responsible okay
so won't be talking politics for a quite
a long time now because I'm on to the
multiverse completely abstracted away
from anything to do with droughts and
political systems to our large extent so
look forward to that one in a few weeks
until then bye-bye
[Music]